
Concept
=======

The basic idea is to be able to integrate information from different sources
into a QGIS project file. Sources can *generated* from resources like a database
or *manually written* and they may be spread over different files.

In general the file syntax is yaml. Other files may be referenced from a yaml
file if suitable.

Requirements
------------

  * understands table inheritance concept
  * styles are loaded from a qml file
  * understands relations
  * extracts translatable strings into translation files (e.g. .ts)
  * labelling? qml file? translation?
  * creates a legend
  * can be split into multiple files from generic → specific
  * joins

Configurable aspects
--------------------

### Project

The project node contains base information about a project which is not specific to a particular layer.

The project will be read from the key project

```.yaml
project:
  crs: 21781
  name: My Project
  legend:
    - Covers:
      <<: *lyr_qgep_vw_qgep_cover # Load a predefined, generated layer
    - A layer group:
      - baselayer:
        source: baselayer.shp
        style: layer2.qml
```

#### Legend

The legend consists of a list where each element is either a layer or a layer group.
If an element is a key/value pair it's interpreted as a layer, if it's a list, it's treated as a layer group.

```.yaml
project:
  legend:
  - layer:
    source: layer.shp
    style: layer.qml
  - group:
    - layer2:
      provider: postgres
      source: service='pg_qgep' key='"obj_id"' estimatedmetadata=true table="qgep"."od_maintenance_event" sql=
    - layer3:
      ...
```

This is the "main entry point" for loading layers. While it's possible to specify layers directly in here, it's often more advisable to load them from somewhere else via reference.

#### CRS

The CRS is specified as a simple EPSG number

```.yaml
project:
  crs: 21781
```
  
If the CRS is not specified, the crs of the first layer which is found will be used.
    
Further requirements like custom CRSes are not planned at the moment but may be added on request.

#### Initial extent

The initial extent can be specified as an array of xmin, xmax, ymin, ymax

```.yaml
project:
  extent: [643700, 649410, 180300, 184200]
```
    
or a layer can be specified which will be queried for the extent. Just specify the layer id as string.

```.yaml
project:
  extent: layer_id
```

#### Relations

relations:

#### Style presets

To be done

#### Custom properties

Custom properties are simple key value pairs and mapped as such

```.yaml
project:
  custom_properties:
    my_plugin/initial_value/of_something: 400
    some_other_setting/is: True
    or/can/be/a_string: "Which can be specified like so"
    or/even/multiline: >

The existence of the human conception of self-awareness can
only be understood by humans and is a complex topic in itself.
You could ask René Descardes if he would still be among us who
once came to a similar conclusion. *Cogito ergo sum*.
```

#### Transaction groups

Is a simple boolean flag

```.yaml
project:
  autotransaction: True
```

### Layers

Each layer and its properties can be configured. Layers are placed under the legend node.

```.yaml
project:
  legend:
    - Wastebins:
      source: /some/shapefile
      id: wastebins
    - Basemap:
      ...
```

To keep the project more readable it is often more practical to just reference them in the legend node and define them somewhere else, probably even in a separate file.

```.yaml
project:
  legend:
    - Wastebins:
    <<: *wastebins
    - Basemap:
    <<: *basemap
    
wastebins: &wastebins
  source: /shome/shapefile
  id: wastebins
  
basemap: &basemap
  ...
```

**Note:** Parts of layer definitions will often be generated by *generators* and only fine-tuned by a system administrator.

#### Layer ID

Each layer may have a layer id defined. In case it's undefined, an id will be generated. Layer ids need to be unique within a project.

```.yaml
layername:
  id: my_unique_name
```

#### Data source

The datasource defines where the data is loaded from and in case it is supported saved to. In its most simple form, it is just a filename. In this case it will be loaded via OGR provider.

**Note:** It is possible that in the future there will be more intelligence introduced to choose an appropriate provider.

```.yaml
layername:
  source: /home/mkuhn/data/mydata.shp
```

It is possible to specify a specific data provider to define where a layer is loaded from.

```.yaml
layername:
  source: service='pg_qgep' key='"obj_id"' estimatedmetadata=true table="qgep"."od_cover" sql=
  provider: postgres
```

Supported provider types are defined by QGIS but for a short reference:

 * postgres
 * spatialite
 * ogr
 * gdal
 * wms
 * wfs
 * [others](https://github.com/qgis/QGIS/tree/master/src/providers)

In this case, the source string depends on the provider in use.

#### Symbology

The style node is a simple reference to a QML file which is looked up on a path relative to the path of the current file.

```.yaml
layer:
  symbology: covers_symbology.qml
```

From this file, ONLY the symbology definitions are loaded. Labeling, widgets, joins and everything else that has been thrown into this file is loaded and defined separately.

**Note:** It is possible that a way of defining a style in yaml will be introduced in the future.

**Note:** A new layer property `style` may be introduced in the future to load everything from a qml file.

#### Labeling

The style node is a simple reference to a QML file which is looked up on a path relative to the path of the current file.

```.yaml
layer:
  labels: covers_labels.qml
```

From this file, ONLY the label definitions are loaded. Symbology, widgets, joins and everything else that has been thrown into this file is loaded and defined separately.

**Note:** It is possible that a way of defining a style in yaml will be introduced in the future.

**Note:** A new layer property `style` may be introduced in the future to load everything from a qml file.

##### Translation of labels

Translation of labels (often) needs to translate strings from the database what makes it more complex than translation of strings from this project definition. Translation of labels is done with the use of regular expressions.

```.yaml
layer:
  labeling:
    source: xyz.qml
    translation_rules:
      - regex: "^Cover"
        default: "Cover"
```

This will cause two things to happen:

 * A new entry in the translation table for "Cover" which is the default translation
 * Wrap the label expression in a regex `s/^Cover/{default or translated text}/g`. This allows using backreferences and advanced regex magic.

**Note:** Still need to figure out rule based labeling translation

**Problem:** Exporting the labels to qml from a generated project will cause the labels to already contain the regex and reusing it will result in double-wrapping. Maybe we will need to add information about this in an expression comment or similar.

#### Actions

```.yaml
layer:
  actions:
    - name: Party
      icon: 🎉
      type: python
      action: |

        from qgis.core import Drinks, Fireworks, Mood

        Fireworks().launch()
        mood = Mood()
        while mood.ok():
            Drinks().serve()
```

#### Forms

#### Widgets/Fields

#### Joins

#### Virtual fields

#### Custom layer properties

```.yaml
layer:
  properties:
    pluginX/configOption: 1
    pluginY/cfg: foo
```

#### Feature title

```.yaml
layer:
  feature_title: COALESCE("identifier", 'N/A')
```

## Generators

Generators extract information which can be used in a .qgs project file from
data sources like postgres databases. This will be brought into an intermediate
yaml metafile which can then be referenced by other files, which most likely
are manually written control files.

An example for a yaml file created from a postgres database can look like this:

```.yaml
schema: qgep
tables:
  od_wastewater_structure:
    fields:
      obj_id:
        default: [function to generate serial]
        primary: true
      level:
        type: int
        min: 0
        max: 4000
  od_manhole:
    fields:
      obj_id:
        default: [function to generate serial]
```

## Includes

Source files can be included with an `include` directive. An `ìnclude` directive
loads a yaml file. The structure defined by the included file will be loaded
before the current file is loaded. The current file has the possibility to overwrite
any of the specifications in the source file.

```.yaml
layers:
  fields:
    - id:
      alias: ID
      
  
```

## Data sources

Describe a datasource and how to connect to it. Which fields are available and which constraints apply to the fields.

Layers
------

Describe how a datasource should be visualized and may override properties of a data source. Multiple layers may reference the same data source.

* Layers can reference a QML style
* Layers can define actions
  * python (required)
* Fields will be loaded from the dataprovider and appropriate widgets will be created - based on:
  * datatype
  * constraints
  * relations
* Field definitions can be overwritten with more appropriate user values

Project Description
-------------------

A project description file contains metainformation for the project to generate
as well as a legend.

```.yaml
include: qgep_db.yaml # Load the qgep db 

project:
  name: qgep
  author: OPENGIS.ch
  crs: 2056
  extent: [2607360, 1182010, 2625720, 1174450]
  legend:
    - od_manhole: # Dictionaries are layers
      type: layer
      source: @od_manhole
      style: manhole.qml
      name: Manhole # This can be skipped and left to the translation unit
    - Base layers: # Lists are groups
      - cadastral_data:
        source: [some wms]
      - some_features:
        source [some wfs]
        style: some_features.qml
```

View generator
--------------

For object inheritance, views will be generated, that generate one view for the
parent object.

 * with a special attribute `type` which specifies on which subtable
an object is found
 * all attributes of the subtables are grouped in the view
 * prefixes based on the subtable name will be added on collision

Object inheritance tables are always abstract.

Translation
-----------

When loading a metaproject file, a .ts file gets produced as a by-product. This file includes the following strings as translation sources:

  * field aliases
  * layer legend name
  * value relation value column
  * value map column
  * labelling - **how?**

The .ts file can be translated via transifex or qt linguist or other means to any language.

The load metaproject function takes an optional parameter for a translated translation file. In this case, the generated project will be translated with the resources found in the .ts file.
